---
title: "Character Essay: An Inspector Calls - Mr. Birling"
description: Character Essay - "Mr. Birling" from "An Inspector Calls"
date: 2022-05-08
---

# How does Priestley explore the character of Mr Birling in the play An Inspector Calls?

In the play “An Inspector Calls” by J.B. Priestley, the playwright presents the character of Mr Birling as a self-centred, irresponsible, and wealthy caricature of capitalism. He is the patriarch in the prestigious Birling family who contributed to Eva Smith's death and ultimately declined to undertake any responsibility. Priestley uses him as an antithesis to express his socialist view.

The playwright portrays the Birlings as a family of high social class and explores Mr Birling's superficiality and self-interest as a result of his affluence, dominance, and reputation. This is revealed when he told Gerald "your engagement to Sheila means a tremendous lot to me", this implies Mr Birling's hypocrisy and elitist attitude. The adjective "tremendous" is ironic as it exhibits that the engagement matters to him simply because of the financial and social advantages that are exposed to him as opposed to him being delighted for his daughter. This absurd and unconventional orientation depicts Priestley's criticism towards capitalism where people are acquisitive and self-regarding. Moreover, the pronoun "me" reflects that Mr Birling is making his daughter's engagement all about himself, suggesting that Mr Birling believes he has absolute ownership of her life events because of his gender, age, and relatively higher position in the family hierarchy, which conveys his narcissism as he prioritises himself pertaining to others. Similarly, he tries to astonish Gerald and prove that he is financially capable when he asserts "You ought to like this port, Gerald.". Priestley uses the prop "port" to symbolise wealth and power in capitalist society because its high cost alone would be prohibitive for working-class people. Thus it insinuates how Mr Birling's attentiveness of his social image associated with affluence constructs his character as shallow and avaricious. This reiterates the playwright's criticism of the superficial capitalist society where one's social status is correlated to their materialistic possessions. Alternatively, this also demonstrates his view on other people as he assumes that like him, materialistic representations are salient for one's self-esteem; which further reinforces his narcissistic and paralysing perspective.

Moreover, Mr Birling is also presented as a foolish and ill-informed character who misinterprets and overestimates everything. Priestley uses dramatic irony in the play such as "the titanic … and unsinkable, absolutely unsinkable.", where he is unshaken in his own belief about the Titanic and how it is "absolutely unsinkable", but the audience is conscious that it did sink to the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, which suggests how unintelligent and illogical the character is. His repetition of the word "unsinkable" reveals his confidence and coupled with the adverb "absolutely", insinuates his strong belief in his own opinion. Subtly, the Titanic symbolises his own family and the frangible relationship between them; Mr Birling thought that everything would be flawless and untouchable, but in reality, it collapsed proving Mr Birling's erroneous perspective. He also stated that "Russia, which will always be behindhand naturally." as he appraises Russia's potential and asserts the fixating mindset in which Russia would never grow as fast and would always be left behind other countries; this is incorrect from the audience's point of view and knowledge considering how, after the Russian revolution in 1917, Russia then got put on the map as a superpower. In addition to that, he also assured everyone that "We're in for a time of steadily increasing prosperity", which is proven wrong by The Great Depression, one of the most devastating economic catastrophes, which happened in 1930s America; this further emphasises his delusion and misinterpretation of the world as he fails to predict the economic trends around the world. Alternatively, this reiterates his egocentrism and exhibits that he is merely considering the impact of the global economy on his own business, he ignores that the working class people are still suffering from low labour costs and how reality is still inhumane for them. The way Mr Birling regards his workers as "cheap labour" braces the fact that he exploits and dehumanises his employees on behalf of his own welfare; and the adjective "cheap" that generates a derogatory connotation when used on his employees, addresses that the only way in which he values people is by their usefulness to himself, which, from an ethical perspective, is irrational and outrageous. All of these reflect his self-assurance and lack of ability to predict the future. Priestley presents him in this way because he wants to express that, similar to how he fails to predict the future, his capitalist views on his business and employees are also fallacious and preposterous from a socialist perspective.

Furthermore, Priestley portrays Mr Birling as a representation of the incorrigible older generation. This is shown by the lack of empathy and awareness he demonstrates upon hearing the death of a working-class girl he fired, Eva Smith, which he did contribute to and therefore should feel guilty about. However, his first reaction was to reject any responsibility for the girl's death where he asserted "Still, I can't accept any responsibility", which expresses how selfish and unsympathetic he is. In specific, the determiner "any" conveys that he doesn't think we are all responsible for each other, which strengthens that he is the representation of capitalism, which opposes the idea of having a community where everyone takes care of each other. Even after the interrogation, he still thinks it's not his fault that the girl committed suicide, which is exhibited when he said “There’s every excuse for what both your mother and I did.”. The noun "excuse" reveals that he knows that what he has done is erroneous, but still he decided to push the responsibility away and pretend as if he's done nothing wrong and toxic to contribute to her death. He is very stubborn and refuses to learn anything from what happened. Throughout the three intense acts, he doesn't learn anything at all and remains completely static, and this is especially reinforced by the cliff-hangers between each one of the acts. Moreover, at the end of the play, the playwright uses a twist ending to indicate the danger of not realising one's mistakes and learning the lesson of social responsibility. After the climax, when Mr Birling thought that everything was a false alarm, he got a phone call where the person on the other side said "A girl has just died – … And a police inspector is on his way here – to ask some – questions". The use of dashes shows that he is afraid of what's going to happen next as he is hesitating to believe the truth and is unwilling to accept any more responsibility; meanwhile, this also creates tension so that the audience would eagerly want to know what's going to happen next. The playwright intends to teach the reader that not learning from one's mistake is a very perilous choice in life, and thereby you would be trapped inside this cycle of making and not learning from your mistakes like how Mr Birling contributed to Eva's death but declined to take on any responsibility. Meanwhile this expresses the playwright's standpoint on the pretentious minds and fatal flaws in the capitalist system as its corrupted core values ultimately lead to catastrophes and guilt. This ending uses cyclical structure to indicate that, even if Eva Smith commits suicide again and again, the tragedy reoccurs, Mr Birling would always be the ignorant and selfish character who is not concerned about others in society and never understands his own faults and remains totally static throughout.

In conclusion, Mr Birling is a crucial character in the play as he is used by Priestley to explore the themes of capitalism, responsibility, and wealth throughout. He is the opposite of socialism and is used as a refutation of the capitalist system to teach the audience how an accountable and responsible person should behave in the playwright's point of view.
