---
title: "Character Analysis: Of Mice and Men - George"
description: Analysis of character "George Milton" from "Of Mice and Men"
date: 2022-05-09
category: books
---

# Character Analysis: Of Mice and Men - George

Throughout the entirety of the novel "Of Mice and Men", Steinbeck presents the character George Milton as a typical migrant farmer who travels around the country seeking a job, in 1930s America during The Great Depression to portray the cruel reality and unbearable life due to the devastating financial crisis.

The quote "George spat on the floor disgustedly. 'We got ten bucks between us.'" informs the reader about George and Lennie's lack of financial independence during The Great Depression, where people had financial limitations because of the economic crisis causing many people to become homeless and starved; and George's attitude indicates he is not satisfied with what they have given that the place they are striving for costs six hundred dollars. George spitting on the floor is an act of hopelessness and fury, and this exhibits his disapproval of the current situation, which represents the same problem the other migrant farmers faced in 1930s America because of the lack of opportunities to become richer. Meanwhile, the floor could symbolize the bottom of the social hierarchy, therefore this connotes that George would eventually be stuck at the bottom and theorizes that the dream is impossible, which foreshadows their failure. Moreover, his discouragement expresses that he's no longer believing in their American dream, given that there's a giant financial gap between him and his dream. On other hand, this might also exhibit his eagerness to get out of the ranch and live on their own place, which is what most of the migrant farmworkers wanted to, but failed to do in the end; and get out of the loop of poverty and impotence. Based on the situation portrayed by Steinbeck, the reader can infer that poverty was a very severe issue back then, and the financial limitations caused a lot of depression.

George stated "We got a future" to reassure and motivate Lennie. This shows he is an optimistic person who initially believes in the American dream. During the Great Depression, being able to have a future was very hard as it was quite difficult to earn enough money to achieve one's dream, because the farmworkers spent most, if not all of their salary on necessities, and social and recreational activities. Therefore, George considers themselves to be different from the others because they plan on saving the money they earn on the ranch and buying their little place. This demonstrates that George has a different thinking as he knows the only way to break the cycle of depression and poverty. Moreover, the statement indicates that George is a sympathetic character as he understands Lennie and knows well that talking about the dream and their future would keep Lennie happy. More importantly, the dream is very crucial for both of them because it is the only thing allowing the migrant farmworkers in 1930s America to work hard and persevere through challenges. Furthermore, considering that George can still . From the quote, the reader can learn that George and Lennie have their own dream and ambition, which was very common back then, and this leaves a very important question to the reader - are they going to succeed?

Towards the end of the novel, "George said softly, '-I think I knowed from the very first I think I knowed we'd never do her.' ". He finally speaks the truth and admits that he knew they were not going to achieve their dream in the very beginning, this symbolizes the end of the American dream and concludes the novel with a sad ending. George has been lying all this time to himself and Lennie that the dream is possible because it was very important as it was the only thing they were worth living for. In the 1930s, having dreams was very common among the migrant farmworkers, but in fact, no one accomplished their goal; and this shows how difficult life was for the migrant farmworkers as it was impossible to make any visible progress with the low wages at that time. Meanwhile, this exhibits that George is very caring and paternal because he decided to describe their motivating and beautiful dream before killing Lennie instead of stating the cruel actuality, to let Lennie enjoy the last moments of his life. The character is a representation of a typical migrant farmworker in 1930s America - he has hope and dreams of a better life, but fails to live the optimal life he wants to live.

In conclusion, George Milton plays an essential role in the plot because he effectively reflects the societal issues and how people's life was greatly impacted by them during the Great Depression.
